this is concentrated nitric acid really
nasty stuff especially when it's eaten
up it'll dissolve practically all the
metals from the circuit boards but it
won't affect the gold in industry that
extract the silver and copper from this
but I've only got eyes for one thing
gold but it still leaves us with the
problem of separating the gold from all
the undesirable rubbish that's in
circuit boards which means unfortunately
we're now gonna have to dissolve the
gold it sounds like a gamble but I'm
hoping it'll pay off in the end because
gold is so unreactive I'm going to need
some really powerful acid to dissolve it
this is way beyond school chemistry and
making up what medieval alchemists
called aqua region or royal water it's a
mix of very concentrated and strong
acids strong enough even to dissolve
gold if I get it right it shouldn't
affect the other stuff the gold is mixed
up with but it would happily burn right
through my skin give him the chance a
lot of mining processes involve some
pretty nasty chemistry this is a bad as
noxious as it gets for me
with a bit of added heat all that gold
I've worked so hard to get starts to
vanish if I don't get the next stage of
the recipe right it could be gone
forever you look at that dirty black
liquid I've just made difficult to be
confident that it's full of gold it's a
bit of a leap of faith another few
minutes of stirring at gas mark 4 and
we're done
now I've dissolved my gold into a liquid
all I need to do is pour it through a
filter to separate the gunk from the
good stuff I'm not sure about this I
seem to have made pure green not gold
no matter I should keep following the
recipe add a pinch of urea quite Lively
now comes the chef's secret ingredient
what I'm about to do here is pretty much
the alchemists dream I'm gonna make pure
gold appear from something that isn't
gold this is sodium metabisulfite
nothing everyday compound for folk like
me but chemists use it quite a lot what
it's gonna do effectively is out a
couple of electrons to that gold to turn
it back to gold metal and it goes you've
got a good stir
I'm still not seeing any gold I'm gonna
need more sodium metabisulfite lots more
time to start getting a bit more
freeform with the quantities
[Applause]
a little bit of gold panning later and
I've reduced all the gold from my pile
of circuit boards to this okay I've got
myself there I'm a gold mud at the
moment it looks a bit brown and
uninspiring let's see what happens when
I put a flame to it or perhaps two now
I'm not gonna lie to you I don't hold
out much hope for whatever is left in
that tiny crucible but there is one
thing that should survive there it is
from a bunch of obsolete old electronics
add yourself some potentially lethal
chemicals hits it with over a thousand
degrees of heat and you end up with one
of those and nugget of pure gold
you